Hello Students of Art 125,

We are fast approaching the end of our semester together, and I wanted to take a moment to highlight a couple things for you. First will be all upcoming dates so you aren't caught unaware. The other will be some recent news articles that relate to our course.

Upcoming Dates

As always, please refer to the 'Due Dates And Important Dates' section of the course info for a complete list of dates.

Please remember Unit 9 is asynchronous, if you haven't already, you can make your trip to see are in person anytime before the last week of the course and post about it for full credit.

We are now into unit 11. If you took a week to work on unit 9 and are still in unit 10, don't worry about your pace.  Next week I have given you a week off for the break, you can catch up during this time, and I will grade both units 10 and 11 as due after this point. 

Term papers are also due after the break. Please try to get them in on time so I have a chance to grade them. The last few weeks of the semester will pass by fast/

Contemporary Art News

You are now at the point in the course where you have enough context to understand any contemporary art news, this should be very exiting to you! There are always more artist to get to know, and trends that come and go every year, but the bulk of the historical context is now at your fingertips.

Here are a couple articles that might interest you.


For all graphic artists, comic artists, and really all artists in general, the early passing of a great artist, Kim Jung Gi is a great loss. If you don't know his work already, take a little time to get to know him. He fits right into Unit 11, please feel free to choose him for your discussion post:

The Art of Kim Jung Ji
https://www.kimjunggi.net/

Michael Heizer’s City, which we learned about in Unit 4, has been back in the news as it opens up to visitors. Here was a very interesting take on the work, applying a lot of the concepts we learned about in Unit 5 to look at it under a different cultural lens: 

What Do Native Artists Think of Michael Heizer’s New Land Art Work?
https://hyperallergic.com/763203/what-do-native-artists-think-of-michael-heizers-new-land-art-work/


There has been a lot of social protests against climate change in art museums recently, which have involved 'non-destructive' vandalism of important paintings. Here is but one example:

Klimt Gets Splashed With “Oil” in Latest Climate Protest
https://hyperallergic.com/780354/klimt-gets-splashed-with-oil-in-latest-climate-protest/

Any other news you've seen that you'd like to share?  Just let me know!

Best,
Jonathan
