Hello students of Contemporary Art,

By now I have graded all of your first discussion posts. This was an exceptionally interesting bunch of responses, and if things continue this way I think it’s going to be a great semester for discussion and thought. 

One of the students in your class has been emailing me with some thoughts and questions about this weeks unit. I decided it may be interesting enough to share with the larger group. I’ve taken our discussion, and consolidated and re-written it as a Question and Answer. I hope you find it interesting. Please know I am always available by email for any questions you have as our course progresses.

—

The debate for and against the merits of Abstract Expressionism was intense at the time, and continue to be so three quarters of a century later. Why do Abstract Expressionist paintings cause such an emotional reaction in the general public?

This is a complicated question, and I don’t want to just answer it quickly, as if it could even be answered with a single response.  Instead, I would ask you students to continue to refine your own answer as our course progresses. I do however want to tease out a couple other questions might help you form your answer to this first one.

How important, in the greater history of art, was the AbEx movement?

I would argue Abstract Expressionism, and Pop Art might be the two most important movements we study in our course, as we shall see the principals in each continue to inform every movement that we study afterwards. That being said, to the average American, the entire history of modern and contemporary art is a niche subject, and most people could probably name more pop musicians, film directors, or celebrity chefs today than they could living artists.  

Does that mean it’s not worth studying? 

I’d say that’s part of what I love about it. So few people know much about the visual arts, yet they continue to influence every other artistic discipline. So many trends that make it to the mainstream culture started out in the art of the avant guard. As our course progresses, I hope you start to see these connections too.

So, how famous is Jackson Pollock then?

Many more people may know artists like Picasso, Monet, Van Gogh, and DaVinci, but I’d say after Warhol, he might be the most well known artist that we will study in our course.

In the 1950s and 1960s magazines like Time Life would do big articles on visual artists, talking about their personal lives, with photographs of their paintings and the artists working in their studios. This would bring artists like Jackson Pollock into main stream attention. Our media environment is so much larger and fragmented now that the public as a group rarely experience or discover an artist collectively.

Another thing to know is that Jackson Pollock is an easy artist to mythologize. We will talk about myth later in our course and what this means, but one way to look at it is, it’s easy to create a simplified idea of who Pollock was, and to love or hate this simple image of a much more complex human being.

Here is a great article that asks a very interesting question: Is Pollock famous for the right reasons?

https://artofericwayne.com/2015/01/20/how-art-history-got-jackson-pollcok-all-wrong-and-why-it-matters/


Is the extreme response to AbEx unique to this movement, or is this something we’ve seen at other times?

This I would say, has happened more often than just AbEx. Some examples: The Right of Spring Riot, The Degenerate Art Exhibition, The Electric Dylan Controversy

here are the urls if the links above don’t work: 

https://www.bbc.com/news/magazine-22691267

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Degenerate_Art_exhibition

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electric_Dylan_controversy


If the average US citizen still doesn’t appreciate AbEx, does that mean conservatism won?

Criticism and censorship of the arts and beyond is constantly a concern in the US, just look at recent extreme efforts to censor the books allowed in public libraries.

https://www.nytimes.com/2022/07/06/books/book-ban-librarians.html

In the 50s it was McCarthyism, in the 80s it was Reaganism and now Trumpism, but it’s usually the same battle fought under a different Ism.

We have never supported the arts in the US the way they are supported in Europe. Interestingly though, the history is often much more complicated than it seems on the surface.

Here is a great article about how the CIA used the AbEx movement to fight against communism in the cold war:

https://medium.com/@MichaelMcBride/how-jackson-pollock-and-the-cia-teamed-up-to-win-the-cold-war-6734c40f5b14


Best,
Jonathan
