Welcome to Topics in Contemporary Art!

You now have access to all of the on line material for our course. Please let me know if anything is unclear, hard to find, or not working properly for you, so I can address it for you and the rest of your classmates.

I have tried to outline the most important components of our class in this email. You will be able to refer to this information in the future under the Announcements section of the on line learning environment. Please take a moment to gain familiarity with the learning environment. Here are three places to start once you are able to log in:

Course Info

Take a look under the Course Info section for an overview of our course requirements. Then look under Calendar Dates to understand the pattern of our weekly assignments and for a detailed list of what is due each week. This includes details on everything that is due our first week.

Lessons

Take a look at Unit 1 in the Lessons section. This will be the unit for the first week of class, starting next week.

There is a discussion forum inside of it that you must post to by Thursday night on the first week of class, and then you must respond to two of your classmate's posts by the following Sunday night. These due dates for initial post and responses will be reoccurring almost every week of the semester, normally on the Thursday and Sunday of each week.

Discussion Forums

You can also find all of the semester's discussion forums in the Discussions section. Go find the forum titled "Welcome to the Discussion Forums" inside there now. Go ahead, click into it and introduce yourself to the class. This way you can gain familiarity with each other, and with the system before your first "real" forum post on Thursday.

Here are a few additional items to be aware of:

Quizzes

Each unit usually has one or two quizzes that you should do on your own time. The quizzes are available for you to take as many times as you want, so keep doing them until you are satisfied with your knowledge of the material and with your grade. They are not due at any specific time, but be aware that UNFINISHED ASSESSMENTS TURN INTO A ZERO GRADE when I do the final grading at the end, it is your responsibility to make sure you have completed them all.

Exams

There will be a Midterm and Final Exam, and you will be given time to study for each. All of the questions are multiple choice, taken from the quiz questions from the units. Do well on those and you will be set for the midterm and final.

Field Trip

You will be required to make it out to see galleries or a museum during the semester, and report back about your experience in Unit 9 -- you can find more information about this assignment there. Sometimes circumstances require students to visit virtually, by viewing art on-line. If this is something you will require please get in touch with and we can discuss options.

The week for Unit 9 is dedicated to this activity, but you can complete this assignment at any time during the course.

Research Paper

The information on the research paper is also visible to you already, so you can start thinking about it now, and be ready to start working on it right after the midterm. Please make sure the due date is in your calendar.

A NOTE ABOUT MONDAY HOLIDAYS AND DAYS OFF FOR BAD WEATHER

Every semester we usually have a couple days that the college is closed for bad weather or a Monday holiday. During these weeks we keep the due dates the same as usual -- Thursday night for the first discussion forum post, and Sunday for your responses, because it is easiest to stick to a regular schedule. Just know If you ever need accommodations for these weeks or for any other reason you can email me and ask for an extension.

That's it for now -- see you in the discussion forums!

Professor Jonathan Gabel
