Rapper Brother Ali deftly utilizes modern American signs, recognizable more from news footage than advertisements or pop culture, to commentate on their associated myths. With the re-appropriated iconography in “Mourning in America” he asks for the public’s re-evaluation of its nation. He points to sadly warped signs such as the police officer, who no longer signifies the public's security, the soldier, who is no longer pursuing a valiant calling, and the American flag, which is now more easily linked with violence and death(by the “flag gun” and the coffin, respectively) than with freedom.

This hyper-awareness of his cultural surroundings make Brother Ali a postmodern artist, as his lyrics speak not only of his own experiences(as evidenced in the Huffington Post article on his maturing appreciation of the weight of words), but also ask listeners to evaluate their own. The song lays out truths a lot less optimistically than, say, Tupac's “Changes”, but in both cases the focus of the song is more to probe thought from the audience on the issues its covering than arguing for the artists point of view on them. Towards the end of the song, Ali declares, “I just call it how I see it,” and that is the core of his message: awareness and honest reflection on the state of America – that the opinions you have on the country, whether they be good or bad, should be based on current myths.

-----

Post modernism gave us  the theory on how to appropriately create art and even create a satire of our own reality. Brother Ali makes a satire of the war and conflicts in Afghanistan and the middle eastern countries, crossing the point of racism while increasing the generalization, even by satanizing all of the arabic races, labeling them as a terrorist. As he presented in his video, these races are suffering from a new kind of racism. As we study in the first 5 units, contemporary art has a close connection with our environment, feelings, personal experiences, race and concerns. And in most cases, express something painful from its creator by transforming it into art or in something beautiful that claims for attention, as Kara Walker with her paper silhouettes. I feel Lupe Fiasco is a good example of the concern of young people regarding society and political decisions. He makes music that cause the audience to look around and stop listening to the noises that are covering what is really happening. The cover of his album contains a bar code as a main part of the american flag.This is for me a clear representation about how the american pride is changing to be only a bar code, a label in products that are not even made in the U.S. no more. Personally, I love the passion of these two musicians and the way that they make art with their music, that is not only beautiful and rhythmic but has a lot sense of humanity, compassion. While in some cases, madness and dark humor, as many of the painters and sculptures that we study previously.   
>  I disagree that Brother Ali is using satire as I think the issues he raps about are very real. I also disagree that he's stereotyping or demonizing the Arabic people, as he himself is Muslim. In fact I'd say he's doing the exact opposite of that by saying that violence, no matter the cause, is a terrible thing. Consider this stanza from "Mourning in America".

 >"Terrorism is the war of the poor - Hold up a mirror so the script get flipped - Cause when it’s in reverse it ain’t wrong no more - Warfare’s the terrorism of the rich" 

>In it, he equates terrorism to warfare as they are both simply violence with different names. "Warfare" is noble, warfare is two forces fighting each other to win something. "Terrorism" is senseless violence being done to innocent citizens. So we wage a "War on terror" against the enemy. We're fighting the good fight, and they're mindlessly killing our innocent people, right? Wrong, as Ali states in his next stanza. 

>"Who’s the true guerilla - When the bomb on your body killing innocent civilians - But a life is a life and a killer is a killer - You’re at a desk chillin’ push a button kill a million"

>Again, Ali further blurs the line between the enemy and our own forces. What's the difference between a terrorist attack that kills a bus full of innocents, and an airstrike that wipes out a small village? Innocents still die either way. Ali sends the message home with the lyrics "When innocent people perish - It’s a very thin line between a soldier and a terrorist". 

>We're on a discussion forum so I'm not sure death of the author applies here. If I misunderstood what you were writing about, please feel free to respond so I may better understand.

>>Good evening, thanks for posting on my answer regarding Brother Ali. I appreciate that you gave me your own considerations and I respect that. I only would like to give you my honest considerations in regards. As  we have learned in these five units of contemporary art theories, art can be understood in different ways. This case in particular, I evaluated the music video. And that it is my own interpretation about this piece. This was easy for me because as we had studied semiotic in the last unit, the video can be understood in different ways when language is not part of your analysis.   I invite you to watch the video again without understanding what the singer is rapping about and maybe you can see my own interpretation. Thanks again for your input. I honestly watched the video again and everything seemed completely different.
Note: I am not for USA English is not my first language and the lyrics was not part of my analysis.  

>>>Yes, as we've learned in this lesson in particular, each person can give a work their own meaning. Your interpretation was different than my own, but equally as valid as we've learned from the ideas of death of the author. I apologize if I had offended you at all with my reply. I was trying to explain my understanding of the song, but I may have come across the wrong way. With that said, I'd like to thank you for explaining things from your point of view. After rewatching the video with the volume muted, I can definitely see how you arrived at your interpretation. Once again, thank you for bettering my understanding.

---

...I found his article on homophobia in Hip Hop quite interesting. It's refreshing, to me at least, to see someone who has actually used derogatory phrases publically in the past and then have enough sense to be able to understand why it's wrong and own up to his mistakes. It's an interesting comparison when contrasted against Tyler the Creator later on in the piece who's stance on the matter is: "I'm not homophobic. I just think 'f****t' hits and hurts people. It hits. And 'gay' just means you're stupid. I don't know, we don't think about it, we're just kids. We don't think about that s--t. But I don't hate gay people. I don't want anyone to think I'm homophobic." I would be lying if I said that quote didn't rub me the wrong way. That kind of childish and irresponsible attitude/philosophy towards such harmful words cannot and should not be tolerated, especially coming from a prominent social figure such as Tyler. Because as Ali points out, he realized that those words have a much larger effect than he cared to think at the time. It doesn't matter what the "author"'s stance on the word is or how he interprets it, it's how it affects others in ways the "author" might not be aware of. All of this ties nicely into Roland Barthes' Death of the Author, as he eloquently describes how the "author", no matter the medium, is separate from the actual work itself and that how ever the viewer decides to interpret the work is how it will always be interpreted- whoever the author was, and the author's interpretation/opinion on the matter, is irrelevant.

