Welcome to Topics in Contemporary Art!

Most of you have found your way to the pages of our class already, and have seen that Unit 1 is available for you.  If you haven't noticed, there is a discussion forum which requires a post from you this Thursday night and two more on Sunday. These two due dates (Thursday and Sunday) will be reoccurring almost every week of the semester.

Most of the information you need is available to you on the welcome page at the top of our class.  I just want to give you a couple more bits of information here:

Grades break down as follows:

Discussion Forums    30%
Research Paper    20%
Exams            30%
Quizzes            20%

EXAMS AND QUIZZES:

There will be a Midterm and Final Exam, and you will be given time to study for each.  All of the questions are multiple choice, taken from the assessments (quizzes) in the units.  Do well on those and you will be set for the final.

Each unit usually has one or two assessments (quizzes) that you should do on your own time. The assessments are available for you to take as many times as you want, so keep doing them until you are satisfied that you know the material and with your grade. They are not due at any specific time, but be aware that UNFINISHED ASSESSMENTS TURN INTO A ZERO GRADE when I do the final grading at the end, it is your responsibility to make sure you have completed them all.

TRACKING GRADES: 

Become familiar with the green "Report" tab at the top of the course, it has settings that show you your current grades and uncompleted assignments.

DISCUSSION FORUMS

Each unit has a discussion forum, with one post due on Thursday night, and two responses due Sunday night. Make sure you remember to come back and post responses in a timely manner.

RESEARCH PAPER  

I have make the information on the research paper visible to you already, so you can start thinking about it, but you won't have to choose an artist or do anything until after the midterm. More information to follow.

EMAILS: 

There is a mail program within Mercer on line, which I check every couple of days.  Want to get in touch with me faster? Write to me at my faculty email address (gabelj@faculty.mccc.edu) and it will download onto my home computer right away. Want me to email you at a different address? Send it to me and I'll add it to my class email list.

That's it for now -- see you in the discussion forums!

Professor Jonathan Gabel